+++
title = "Modular Javascript bindings from Rust"
date = 2024-11-05T22:00:00
+++

I've been working on a Rust library for time series data analysis which comes with both
Python and Javascript bindings. The Javascript bindings are generated from
a Rust crate which belongs to the Cargo workspace, which has been OK so far, but as the
scope of the project has grown (from just forecasting originally, to outlier detection,
clustering, changepoint detection, and more), the size of the WASM bundle has grown to
about 1MB, which is... not enormous, but definitely not ideal.

It's particularly annoying when users only want to use a tiny fraction of the library,
but must load the entire WASM bundle first. What I'd really like is for my JS library's
package.json to look something like this:

```json
{
  "name": "@bsull/augurs",
  "version": "0.6.0",
  "files": [
    "*.wasm",
    "*.js",
    "*.d.ts",
    "snippets/"
  ],
  "main": "core.js",
  "exports": {
    ".": "./core.js",
    "./clustering": "./clustering.js",
    "./dtw": "./dtw.js",
    "./prophet": "./prophet.js",
    "./outlier": "./outlier.js",
  },
  "types": "augurs.d.ts"
}
```

Users could then import the parts of the library they need like this:

```js
import { Prophet } from '@bsull/augurs/prophet';
```

I can think of a few ways to do this:

## 1. Manually split the JS crate into multiple crates

This approach appears to be the most straightforward. Rather than the
JS crate being a single crate with each set of bindings in a module,
we split it into multiple crates, each with a single module.
We can then use [`wasm-pack`] with each crate to generate
the JS bindings for that module, shove them all into a single directory,
manually generate the `package.json` file, and we're done.

This is _fine_, but it's a bit of a pain to maintain (each original Rust
crate has to have a corresponding JS crate). Not only that but each
WASM module is self-contained, so if a user wants to use more than one
module, there's a bunch of duplication in amongst them (e.g. all the WASM
machinery, `serde` stuff, `tracing`, etc is duplicated). So the overall bundle
size is probably larger than we started with, but if someone only wants to use
outlier detection, they save bandwidth. Great.

**But**. Not _all_ of the modules are self contained. For example, both the
`clustering` and `dtw` modules use a shared `DistanceMatrix` type, which is
intended to be opaque to users, returned from distance matrix calculation functions
in `dtw` and consumed by clustering functions in `clustering`. This will only
work if the WASM modules know how to talk to each other, which they don't. Passing
an object returned from one module to another isn't possible - they each have their
own memory space. We'd need to deserialize and reserialize the data in order to
pass it between modules, which can be quite slow if the data is large.

It's certainly an option, but it's not perfect.

## 2. Create a WASM component for each piece of functionality

This feels exactly like the [WASM component model][component model]'s raison d'être: allowing multiple
core WASM modules to talk to each other. The idea would be to create
a separate WASM component for each module, starting with an interface
defined using [WIT][wit], then using [`cargo-component`] to generate the bindings
and implementing them in Rust. These would supersede the existing JS crate;
we could then use [`jco`] to generate the JS bindings for each component.

The feasibility of this approach depends entirely on how `jco` generates the
initialization code for the WASM modules. It's not clear to me how it would
know about the dependencies between the modules, and how it would handle
the case where a module depends on another module. Ideally it'd just load exactly
what it needs for any given module, but it's not clear how to do that.

For example, in the situation above, both `dtw` and `clustering` depend on
`DistanceMatrix`, but `DistanceMatrix` is defined in the `core` module. If
someone imports `clustering`, I'd want the bindings to load and instantiate
the `core` and `clustering` modules. Then if someone imports `dtw`, I'd want
the bindings to load and instantiate only the `dtw` module, and use the existing
`core` module.

I've yet to find out if this is possible, but I'll write more about it if I do.

One way I think it might work is by having a final wrapper WASM component which
imports and re-exports the other components. This way, the dependency tree of the
modules would be known to `jco`, so it would hopefully be able to generate
optimal bindings. The last time I tried this, it didn't work for two reasons:

- the initialization code generated by `jco` was very eager to load all of the
  WASM modules, even if they weren't needed, which is no better than the
  approach we're currently taking. It _is_ possible to modify the instantiation
  code somewhat (mentioned in [the instantiation docs][instantiation docs])
  but I struggled to do anything meaningful here.
- the Rust bindings generated by `cargo-component` produced separate Rust modules
  with separate types for each interface, so I would have had to write a _ton_
  of boilerplate to convert types between those expected by each module.
  I asked about this on the [jco Zulip][zulip] and it sounded like this might
  be fixable by first defining the types in some separate shared WIT file.
  I'll probably try that next.

---

And... I think that's it? If you know any other ways to do this, please let me know!
My contact details are on the [about page](/about).

[`wasm-pack`]: https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-pack/
[component model]: https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/
[wit]: https://component-model.bytecodealliance.org/design/wit.html
[`cargo-component`]: https://github.com/bytecodealliance/cargo-component
[`jco`]: https://bytecodealliance.github.io/jco/
[instantiation docs]: https://bytecodealliance.github.io/jco/transpiling.html#instantiation
[zulip]: https://bytecodealliance.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/409526-jco/topic/.E2.9C.94.20'wrapper'.20component.3F
